Story:

On the night of June 30 to July 1, 1520, the Spanish conquerors under Hernán Cortés fled from the city of Tenochtitlan, capital of the Aztec empire. Many of them only tried, because they remained locked in the slaughterhouse island or because the indigenous warriors reached their blood in time to offer it to their gods.

For the Aztec (or Mexican) enemies, it was not a Joyful Night, but a Night of Vengeance, in which they adjusted a long list of accounts with the invaders. You could say that they were returned all together: the entry without permission, the kidnapping of Moctezuma, the recent massacres, the insults to the gods, the theft of gold ... And so on

The Spaniards had entered the capital of the empire on November 8, 1519, that is, they were preparing to spend their first summer in Tenochtitlan. But the situation was complicated. In the absence of Hernán Cortés, Captain Pedro de Alvarado remained in command in the square in the Aztec capital. This advance decided to launch a preventive attack on the occupied to avoid problems.
Alvarado's attack is known as the killing of the Templo Mayor.

Moctezuma's death left the Spaniards in an unsustainable situation, surrounded by thousands of Mexican warriors thirsty for revenge, and with hardly any food in the Axayácatl palace. For greater adversity, the natives had dismantled the access bridges to the island. The flight was non-extendable and Cortes organized it, also ordered to load all the gold that was possible

The expedition was organized as follows: at the forefront were Gonzalo de Sandoval, Diego de Ordás, Francisco de Acevedo, Francisco de Lugo, Antonio de Quiñones and Andrés de Tapia, with one hundred soldiers, loose young men, twenty horsemen and 400 Tlaxcalans; in the middle, with the treasure, were Cortés, Alonso de Ávila, Cristóbal de Olid, along with the artillery, Malintzin - the darling of Cortes - and other indigenous women, the Mexican prisoners and the bulk of the Spanish and allied forces; and Pedro de Alvarado, Juan Velázquez de León, the cavalry and most of the soldiers taken from Pánfilo de Narváez marched in the rear. In total, between one thousand and two thousand Spaniards together with more than 10,000 Tlaxcalans.

At the signal of Cortes the fugitives set out under the slogan of silence, taking care of the whinny of the horses. The plan was to build a bridge with beams of the Axayácatl palace, leave the island and march towards Tacuba, and then regroup with its allies in Tlaxcala. Despite stealth efforts, they were detected and then Lake Texcoco was packed with canoes loaded with fierce warriors, who came to the call of the drums.

This is how Bernal tells it: «And being in this, the voices and bugles and shouts and whistles of the Mexicans sound, and they said in their language to those of the Tatelulco:“ Come out quickly with your canoes, which leave the teules, and shortcuts , let none remain alive! ” And when I didn't catch up, we saw so many squadrons of warriors above us and the whole lagoon curdled with canoes, that we couldn't use, and many of our soldiers had already passed.

«On the Sad Night it rained and the blood mixed with the water» Cortes and the men who reached the other shore, had to make their way to stabbed and stabbed before the large number of enemies waiting on the other side of the bridge, armed with long spears "Oh cuilones (homosexuals), and you are still alive!" They shouted at them. The Sad Night was a night of dogs in which it rained and the blood mixed with the water, which at every moment became more and more red. «We could not do anything, because shotguns and crossbows, all were on the bridge, and being at night, what could we do but what we did? What was it to lash out and give some slashes to those who came to help us, and walk and move forward until we left the roads? ”Bernal wonders.

At one point, some captains suggested Cortes, wounded in one hand, return to protect the stragglers, and he replied that those who had left was a miracle. However, they tried to return on the road, but immediately ran into Pedro de Alvarado, wounded, one of the last to escape from the Aztec hell. Hundreds of Spaniards and Txalcaltecas were buried in the lagoon, along with dozens of horses and mares and ninety percent of Axayácatl's treasure. Upon hearing Alvarado's story, Hernán Cortés could not hold back the tears.